doc/dist-readme.md, before:

<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: 0BSD -->

<a href="https://github.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz">
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz/main/doc/example.svg"
       alt="Drawing of a nested tuple structure, made using palgoviz.object_graph"
       title="Drawing of a nested tuple structure, made using palgoviz.object_graph"
       width="350px">
</a>

# palgoviz - Materials for Python and algorithms, with visualization

*palgoviz* is a project to develop approaches and materials for teaching and
learning Python together with algorithms and data structures, with a
substantial component of visualization.

**This package is not most of palgoviz.** Most users of palgoviz should clone
[**the palgoviz GitHub repository**](https://github.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz)
instead. That page includes instructions. You most likely will *not* want to
install palgoviz with `pip` or have it as a dependency of another project, but
it is for those rather special situations that this PyPI package exists.

Because of palgoviz’s educational nature, its unit tests and Jupyter notebooks
are important in most uses. This package omits them, as well as most
documentation. Furthermore, the main use for palgoviz, as detailed further in
the repository readme, is as source of exercises (which may require
modification for your use) or of ideas for them. In that use, installing this
very limited palgoviz package does not help at all.

Depending on the direction of the project, it is possible that, in the future,
more uses cases for installing palgoviz as a library will arise. For now, that
is a niche use, and [the palgoviz GitHub
repository](https://github.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz) is the recommended way to
read about, and obtain, palgoviz.

Commit message:

Proofread docs; add some missing 0BSD license info

doc/dist-readme.md, after:

<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: 0BSD -->

<a href="https://github.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz">
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz/main/doc/example.svg"
       alt="Drawing of a nested tuple structure, made using palgoviz.object_graph"
       title="Drawing of a nested tuple structure, made using palgoviz.object_graph"
       width="350px">
</a>

# palgoviz - Materials for Python and algorithms, with visualization

*palgoviz* is a project to develop approaches and materials for teaching and
learning Python together with algorithms and data structures, with a
substantial component of visualization.

**This package is not most of palgoviz.** Most users of palgoviz should clone
[**the palgoviz GitHub repository**](https://github.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz)
instead. That page includes instructions. You most likely will *not* want to
install palgoviz with `pip` or have it as a dependency of another project, but
it is for those rather special situations that this PyPI package exists.

Because of palgoviz’s educational nature, its unit tests and Jupyter notebooks
are important in most uses. This package omits them, as well as most
documentation. Furthermore, the main use for palgoviz, as detailed further in
the repository readme, is as a source of exercises (which may require
modification for your needs) or of ideas for them. In that use, installing this
very limited palgoviz package does not help at all.

Depending on the direction of the project, it is possible that, in the future,
more reasons to install palgoviz as a library will arise. For now, that is a
niche use, and [the palgoviz GitHub
repository](https://github.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz) is the recommended way to
read about, and obtain, palgoviz.

*[palgoviz is licensed under
**0BSD**](https://github.com/EliahKagan/palgoviz/blob/main/LICENSE), a
“public-domain equivalent” license.*
